# Efficient Frontier Simulator

Efficient Frontier simulator using Monte Carlo simulation and multi-asset covariance for generating a modern portfolio theory analytical dashboard

---

## Project Synopsis

This program simulates potential weight allocations of an equity portfolio using Monte Carlo simulation to generate the Efficient Frontier. Live market data is dynamically pulled from Yahoo Finance via the yfinance library to compute annualized equity returns, historical volatilities, and correlations between asset pairs. The highly optimized simulation generates 100,000+ portfolios with differing position allocations to identify both the Maximum Sharpe Ratio portfolio (generates the highest return per unit of risk) and the Minimum Variance portfolio. The resulting multi-panel display functions as a PM's dashboard, providing correlation and covariance heatmaps, a precise breakdown of the Maximum Sharpe and Minimum Variance portfolios, as well as an interactive Efficient Frontier. Noteworthy portfolios are also highlighted along with a representation of the Capital Market Line which allows users to explore the theoretical trade-offs of risk and return across portfolios with varying asset structures.

---

## Technical Approach

### Efficient Frontier

#### What is the Efficient Frontier?

The Efficient Frontier is a concept in Modern Portfolio Theory created by Harry Markowitz that represents a boundary line on a graph that shows the best possible return an investor can get for a specific level of risk. 

#### The Efficient Frontier Exhibited in This Project

The Efficient Frontier generated by this program looks different than one usually might, this is due to the inclusion of the inefficient portfolios that lie below the Efficient Frontier, creating a cloud of all the generated portfolios.

Notable aspects of the Efficient Frontier include:
- The Frontier Line which sits on the upper edge of the generated cloud of portfolios. A portfolio is only "efficient" if it sits on the Frontier Line. The return of the portfolio can not be increased without taking on more risk, and the risk cannot be lowered without sacrificing return.
- The returns provided by inefficient portfolios that sit below the Frontier Line can be achieved with a different asset structure that takes on less risk.
- The empty space above the Frontier Line is an impossible level of return to reach given the level of risk and the asset selection of the portfolio.

### Monte Carlo Simulation

#### What is Monte Carlo Simulation?

Monte Carlo simulation is a way to model the probability of different outcomes for a process whose outcome cannot be easily predicted due to the inclusion of random variables. Monte Carlo simulation is used to understand the impact of risk and uncertainty and in investing can be used to model the range of potential risk and return outcomes across different portfolio weight allocations.

#### Monte Carlo Simulation Used in This Project

In this project, Monte Carlo simulation is being used to generate hundreds of thousands of portfolios with differing position allocations. Utilizing a Monte Carlo simulation allows investors to better grasp the range of possible risk-return outcomes and identify optimal distributions of capital. This allows for the estimation of the Maximum Sharpe Ratio portfolio and the calculation of the Minimum Variance portfolio.

### Annualized Return

#### Annualized Return Using Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR)

The Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) measures the annual rate of return of an investment that is needed to get from the initial price of the asset to the ending price. The return resulting from CAGR is geometric in nature, mirroring the properties of equity growth by compounding over time. 

The Compound Annual Growth Rate is calculated using:

$$\text{CAGR} = \left( \frac{S_{\text{end}}}{S_{\text{start}}} \right)^{\frac{1}{\Delta t}} - 1$$

Where:
- $S_{\text{end}}$ = The ending price of an equity
- $S_{\text{start}}$ = The initial price of an equity
- $t$ = The time horizon as total trading days over trading days in a year

### Historical Volatility Using Simple Returns

#### What is Historical Volatility?

Volatility is the measure of the variance in retruns of a given asset. It is used to represent the risk that is carried by an investment. Volatility in this porject is calculated by annualizing the standard deviation of daily simple returns. 

#### Why Use Simple Returns?

Simple returns are used due to maintaining the geometric nature of the equities in the portfolio. If log returns were taken, the portfolio math for determining return or volatility would not work due to log returns not being additive across a portfolio. Simple returns work because they are additive across asset weights. 

### Accounting for Asset Correlations

#### Why is Accounting for Asset Correlations Necessary?

When simulating allocation distributions of a multi-asset portfolio, the relationships between the assets within the portfolio cannot be ignored. For example, AAPL and NVDA are more likely to move together than AAPL and XOM. Ignoring correlations between equities consequently treats their returns and volatilities as a portfolio independently and improperly estimates the portfolio's return and volatility. Not accounting for the correlations between assets creates the illusion of a diversified portfolio when in reality the returns of an asset could be directly tied to the performance of another. Accounting for the correlations between equities in the portfolio takes 3 main steps:

- Calculating the correlations between asset pairs
- Converting the correlation matrix to a covariance matrix
- Applying the covariance matrix to the weight vector, resulting in the variance of the portfolio

Correlation is the measure of the degree to which two assets move in relation to one another. The correlation matrix is created by computing daily simple returns for each equity and calculating the correlation coefficient of each asset pair. These correlation values can range from -1.0 (inversely correlated) to 1.0 (positively correlated).

The covariance matrix is then generated by capturing how much two assets move together by accounting for their individual volatilities and their correlation. An equity with high volatility that is highly correlated to another equity will have a large covariance with that equity, whereas uncorrelated equities will have a covariance near zero. The covariance matrix is simply the correlation matrix scaled by the volatilities of each asset pair.

After generating the correlation matrix and the covariance matrix, the covariance matrix is applied to each weight vector or set of weights for that portfolio being simulated. This results in the variance of the portfolio which when the square root is taken, gives the portfolio's volatility. 
